Add initial docs about external linkouts to tools (#558)
pathoplexus/pathoplexus: monorepo/website/src/pages/docs/how-to/use-tools-and-add-new-ones.mdx

---
layout: ../../../layouts/DocLayout.astro
title: 'Use external tools and suggest new ones'
order: 105
---

## Using the Tools menu

The sequence search page contains a **Tools** dropdown that lists external

> applications that can be launched with the sequences in your search query or any that you select. Select some sequences (or just make a search), open the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
applications that can be launched with the sequences in your search query or any that you select. Select some sequences (or just perform a search), open the
```

> applications that can be launched with the sequences in your search query or any that you select. Select some sequences (or just make a search), open the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
applications that can be launched with the sequences in your search query or any that you select. Select some sequences (or execute a search to include all search results), open the
```

dropdown and choose a tool. You will be taken to the tool in question which will be supplied with URLs so that it can seamlessly retrieve the sequences you are looking for from Pathoplexus.

Initial tools allow you to:

> - perform QC on sequences with Nextclade and see them on a tree (for some organisms)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- perform QC on sequences with Nextclade and see their placement on a phylogenetic tree (only available for some organisms)
```

- visualise the geographic distribution of your sequences

## Configuring a new tool to be added to Pathoplexus

We are interested in adding new useful external tools to this menu. If you are a tool developer interested in having your tool featured here, please read on.

### Requirements

For a tool to be integrated into the Pathoplexus tools menu, it must be able to:

- Accept file URLs as parameters in its web address
- Automatically fetch and process the files from these URLs and do something useful with them

> When users select your tool from the Tools menu, Pathoplexus will generate download URLs, configured in a way that you specify, then redirect users to your tool with these URLs embedded in the web address. Your tool needs to parse these URLs from its incoming request and retrieve the files directly from Pathoplexus.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When users select your tool from the Tools menu, Pathoplexus will generate download URLs, configured in a way that you specify, then redirect users to your tool with these URLs embedded in the web address. Your tool needs to parse these URLs from the incoming request and retrieve the files directly from Pathoplexus.
```

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Tools are available on a per-pathogen basis; if a tool will only work with some of the pathogens on Pathoplexus, you can add it to just those. If it will work on all pathogens, please add it to every pathogen in your PR.

```

Author: I updated because it seemed a bit unexpected as we hadn't mentioned a "PR" yet - can iterate further!

```json
{
  "name": "My Tool",
  "url": "http://example.com/analysis?data={{[unalignedNucleotideSequences]}}",
  "maxNumberOfRecommendedEntries": 100
}
```

`name` is displayed in the menu, `url` is a template that may contain
placeholders and `maxNumberOfRecommendedEntries` is optional. When this value is
set, users will be warned if they attempt to send more sequences than the limit
suggests.

### URL template placeholders

The URL template may contain placeholders wrapped in square brackets. They are
replaced with download links generated for the current search results. Available
placeholders are:

- `[unalignedNucleotideSequences]` – link to the unaligned FASTA file.
- `[alignedNucleotideSequences]` – link to the aligned FASTA file.
- `[metadata]` – link to a metadata table in TSV format.

Each placeholder can be extended with options:

- `:[segment]` – restricts the sequence download to a specific segment, e.g.
  `[unalignedNucleotideSequences:S]`.
- `+rich` – include rich FASTA headers when supported, e.g.
  `[unalignedNucleotideSequences+rich]`.
- `|format` – request a specific data format such as `json`, e.g.
  `[metadata|json]`.

> - For metadata, `+col1,col2` can be used to include only

Reviewer: maybe explain more that this is `+` a comma-separated list of fields

  certain fields, e.g. `[metadata+country,host]`.

To ensure parts of the URL are properly URL encoded, wrap them in double curly
braces. For example `{{my query}}` becomes `my%20query` after processing. This

> encoding happens after any placeholders are substituted, so `{{[unalignedNucleotideSequences]}}` will become a properly URL-encoded URL to access the unaligned nucleotide sequences. You can even doubly-nest `{{}}` syntax where necessary.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
encoding happens after placeholders are substituted, so `{{[unalignedNucleotideSequences]}}` will become a properly URL-encoded URL to access the unaligned nucleotide sequences. You can even doubly-nest `{{}}` syntax where necessary.
```

Multiple placeholders can appear in a single URL, allowing you to pass both
sequence and metadata downloads to an external tool.

> You can create a PR in the [Pathoplexus repository](https://github.com/pathoplexus/pathoplexus) to add your link-out entries to the configuration under a specific organism, or raise an issue to suggest this.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can create a PR or issue in the [Pathoplexus repository](https://github.com/pathoplexus/pathoplexus) to suggest adding your link-out entries to the configuration under a specific organism, and we'll consider all suggestions.
```
```suggestion
You can create a PR or issue in the [Pathoplexus repository](https://github.com/pathoplexus/pathoplexus) to suggest adding your link-out entries to the configuration under a specific organism, and we'll consider all suggested new tools.
```

Reviewer 2: Oh no why did it appear twice.

Anyway - basically my point here was to clarify that just adding a PR doesn't necessarily mean we'll include your tool - people may come up with silly things we don't want to be obligated to include.
